---
layout: post
title: "[Notes]: Riffing on rAF (requestAnimationFrame)"
description: "Notes on requestAnimationFrame"
tags: notes rAF requestAnimationFrame
---

## Prelude

Sooo...three years later and I'm finally getting around to posting something. I've always kept a
strong pipeline of articles to read and conference talks to watch, but I eventually end up
forgetting all the cool things I learn. I didn't really take any notes or, if I did, they were
always in my trusty moleskine which wasn't really too searchable ): . Thus came the idea to use the
blog as my notebook :D, so here we are...

*DISCLAIMER: These notes are meant to be short and as jump off points for deeper refreshers when
necessary*

## Actual notes :D

- [requestAnimationFrame](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/window/requestAnimationFrame)
  allows you to schedule actions (e.g. animation) to occur with the next layout/paint cycle of the
  browser event loop

- Animations scheduled using a timer (i.e. `setTimeout`), should instead switch to using
  `requestAnimationFrame`

- `requestAnimationFrame` allows you to sync your animations with the refresh rate of the client's
  monitor, thereby eliminating extra work that may be done or missed when using `setTimeout`

- `setTimeout` may be doing mistimed work because its callback is executed as part of the
  browser event loop's task queue. The task queue gets processed after a frame paint and after the
  javascript execution stack is empty. Since you can't tell how long it would take for the stack to
  empty, you cannot be certain that your work scheduled with `setTimeout` will be executed within
  the current frame. Put another way, you cannot be certain that your animation will execute before
  the next paint. This skip in animation work can cause jank for your users.

- If the interval you set for `setTimeout` is less than the refresh rate of a user's monitor, you
  may be doing more work than a user's monitor can actually display to them

- `requestAnimationFrame` is also battery friendly because it doesn't run unless its browser
  window/tab is active.

- A use case for `requestAnimationFrame` are scroll/resize related animations, e.g. parallax
  effects. `rAF` helps avoid jank if you are doing expensive DOM mutations in your scroll event
  handlers

### Useful references

- https://www.paulirish.com/2011/requestanimationframe-for-smart-animating/
- https://css-tricks.com/using-requestanimationframe/
- https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Events/scroll